the unexpurgated pike report foreword by
philip AG report of the House Select
Committee on Intelligence 1976
publishers note the pike committee
report includes extensive footnotes the
footnotes are too substantial to be both
included here and maintain the
listenable narrative thus the footnotes
were excluded from this audiobook
version interested listeners can find
them in the original PDF version of the
report available on archive.org 3
committee recommendations a a House
Committee on Intelligence 1 the Select
Committee recommends that there be
formed a Standing Committee on
Intelligence of the House of
Representatives a the committee
membership should reflect a broad
representation of political and
philosophical views B the committee
should consist of not more than 13 or
less than nine members designated by the
speaker in consultation with the
minority leader representing
approximately the same political ratio
as the House of Representatives see no
member of the committee may serve more
than three consecutive terms on the
committee and no member of the staff may
serve more than 6 years D any past or
current member of the committee staff
who shall release without authorization
of the committee materials or
information obtained by the committee
shall be immediately terminated from
employment and shall be fully subject to
criminal and civil action
notwithstanding legislative immunity II
the committee shall be vested with
subpoena power and shall have the right
to enforce by a proceeding for civil
contempt its subpoenas in the US
District Court for the District of
Columbia or any other court of competent
jurisdiction without authorization from
the house provided the committee has so
designated by resolution the committee
staff shall be given statutory standing
to represent the committee in any
proceeding arising from the issuance of
a subpoena f
the committee's jurisdiction shall
include all legislative and oversight
functions relating to all US agencies
and departments engaged in foreign or
domestic intelligence the committee
shall have exclusive jurisdiction for
budget authorization for all
intelligence activities and exclusive
jurisdiction for all covert action
operations all remaining oversight
functions may be concurrent with other
Committees of the House be release of
information 1 the Select Committee
recommends that rule 11 point 2 e 2 of
the House Rules is amended to read as
follows each committee shall keep a
complete record of all committee action
which shall include a copy of all
reports statements and testimony of
witnesses
whether received an open or an executive
session 2 the committee shall have the
right to release any information or
documents in its possession or control
by a vote of a majority of the members
of the committee under such terms and
conditions as the committee shall deem
advisable the committee in making the
decision whether or not to release such
information shall have the right but not
the duty to consult with other agencies
of the government within the
intelligence community or executive
branch with regard to any decision
relating to the release of such
heretofore secret information 3 in the
event of a negative vote by the
Committee on the release of certain
classified information a member of the
committee may apprise the other members
of the house that the committee
possesses information which he believes
ought to be made public other members of
the House would then be authorized to
have access to that information provided
they sign an agreement not to divulge
the information if these other members
agree that this information ought to be
made public they will sign a petition
attesting to that upon obtaining the
signatures of one-fifth of the house the
house shall convene in secret session
for the purpose of advising the entire
membership of the house of that
information the house may then vote to
release the information to the public
for the select committee recommends that
the rules of the house be revised to
provide that any member who reveals any
classified information which jeopardizes
the national security of the United
States may be censured or expelled by a
two-thirds vote of the house see covert
action one the Select Committee
recommends that all activities involving
direct or indirect attempts to
assassinate any individual and all
paramilitary activities shall be
prohibited except in time of war to the
Select Committee recommends that as to
other covert action by any US
intelligence component the following
shall be required within 48 hours of
initial approval a the Director of
Central Intelligence shall notify the
committee in writing stating in detail
the nature extent purpose risks
likelihood of success and costs of the
operation be the President shall certify
in writing to the committee that such
covert action operation is required to
protect the national security of the
United States see the committee shall be
provided with duplicate originals of the
written recommendations of each member
of the 40 committee or its successor 3
all covert action operations shall be
terminated no later than 12 months from
the date of affirmative recommendation
by the 40 committee or its successor D
NSA as an independent agency 1 the
Select Committee recommends that the
existence of the National Security
Agency should be recognized by specific
legislation and that such legislation
provide for civil control of NSA further
it is recommended that such legislation
specifically define the role of NSA with
reference to the monitoring of
communication of Americans II disclosure
budget totals one the Select Committee
recommends that all intelligence related
items be included as intelligence
expenditures in the President's budget
and that there be disclosure of the
total single sum budgeted for each
agency involved in intelligence or if
such an item is a part or portion of the
budget of another agency or Department
that it be separately identified as a
single item F prohibition of fund
transfers one the Select Committee
recommends there be appropriate
legislation to prohibit any significant
transfer of funds between agencies or
departments in connection with
intelligence activities to the Select
Committee recommends there be
appropriate legislation to prohibit any
significant reprogramming of funds
within agencies or departments in
connection with intelligence activities
without the specific approval of the
Intelligence Committee and appropriate
Committees of Congress 3 the Select
Committee recommends there be
appropriate legislation to prohibit any
significant expenditures of reserve or
contingency funds in connection with
intelligence activities without specific
approval of the Intelligence Committee
and appropriate Committees of Congress G
Director of Central Intelligence 1 the
Select Committee recommends that a
Director of Central Intelligence shall
be created separate from any of the
operating or analytic intelligence
agencies for the purpose of coordinating
and overseeing the entire foreign
intelligence community with a view to
eliminating duplication and collection
and promoting competition and analysis
the DCI shall be nominated by the
president with the advice and consent of
the Senate this office shall have the
following powers and duties a the DCI
shall be the chief foreign intelligence
officer of the United States and shall
be responsible for the supervision and
control of all agencies of the United
States engaged in foreign intelligence
be the DC I shall be a member of the
National Security Council
see the DC I may not hold a position or
title with respect to any other agencies
of government d the DC I shall along
with such other duties constitute an
Office of Inspector General for all of
the foreign intelligence agencies
including other agencies of government
or branches of the military which have
foreign intelligence functions such
agencies shall have the obligation to
report all instances of misconduct or
allegations of misconduct to the DCI
this shall not constitute a limitation
upon the respective agencies reporting
to the DCI from maintaining their own
inspector general staff or similar body
II the DCI shall have an adequate staff
for the purposes expressed herein and to
be responsible for the National
Intelligence Estimates and daily
briefings of the President F the DCI
shall be responsible for the preparation
of the National Intelligence Estimates
and such reports shall be immediately
supplied to the appropriate Committees
of Congress on request G all budget
requests shall be prepared by the
agencies under the jurisdiction of the
DCI as those parts of budget of the
military services or components of
Department of Defence they shall be
submitted as an independent part of such
budgets to the DCI H the DCI shall be
charged with the functions of
coordinating foreign intelligence
agencies under its jurisdiction the
elimination of duplication the periodic
evaluation of the performance and
efficiency of the agencies in question
and shall report to Congress on the
foregoing
at least annually 1 the DCI shall
conduct a comprehensive inquiry into the
causes of intelligence failures
including inadequate collection tasking
analytical bias duplication unusable
technical output excessive compartment
ation and withholding of information by
senior officials and
port to the Committee on Intelligence
within one year H full Gao audit
Authority one the Select Committee
recommends that the General Accounting
Office be empowered to conduct a full
and complete management as well as
financial audit of the intelligence
agencies there shall be no limitation on
the GAO and the performance of these
functions by any executive
classification system and the audit
function of Gao shall specifically apply
to those funds which presently may be
expended on certification of director of
an agency alone I internal financial
management one the Select Committee
recommends that the CIA internal audit
staff be increased and given complete
access to CIA financial records and that
overseas stations be audited at least
annually it is further recommended that
all proprietary and procurement
mechanisms be subjected to annual
comprehensive review by the CIA's
internal audit staff J full disclosure
to Congress 1 the Select Committee
recommends that existing legislation
National Security Act of 1947 section
102 D 3 restricting the directors and
heads of foreign intelligence agencies
from providing full information to
Congress should be amended to exclude
Committees of Congress having
appropriate jurisdiction ok new foreign
operations subcommittee of NSC 1 these
committee recommends that the National
Security Act of 1947 be amended to
provide for the establishment of a
permanent foreign operations
subcommittee of the National Security
Council the subcommittee's jurisdiction
function and composition shall be as
follows
hey the subcommittee shall have
jurisdiction over all authorized
activities of u.s. foreign intelligence
agencies except those solely related to
the gathering of intelligence be the
subcommittee shall advise the President
on all proposed covert or clandestine
activities and on hazardous collecting
activities see each member of the
subcommittee shall be required by law to
submit his individual assessments of
each proposal to the president in
writing the assessment should cover such
matters as the likelihood of success the
benefits of success the damage resulting
from failure or exposure the risks
against the potential benefits and
alternate ways of accomplishing the goal
D the subcommittee shall be chaired by
the assistant to the president for
national security affairs and shall be
composed of assistant to the president
for national security affairs Director
of Central Intelligence secretary of
state secretary of defense deputy
director for intelligence of CIA
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
the Ambassador or ambassadors if there
is one and assistant secretaries of
State for the affected countries and
area L defense and
agency one the Select Committee
recommends that the Defense Intelligence
Agency be abolished and that its
functions be transferred to the
assistant secretary of defense for
intelligence and the CIA M detailees one
the Select Committee recommends that
intelligence agencies disclose the
affiliation of employees on detail to
other government agencies or departments
to all immediate colleagues and
superiors an assistant for national
security affairs one the Select
Committee recommends that the assistant
to the president for national security
affairs be prohibited from holding any
cabinet level position o restrictions on
police training and relationships one
the Select Committee recommends that no
agency of the United States engaged
principally in foreign or military
intelligence directly or indirectly
engage in the training or the supplying
of domestic police agencies of the
United States and that contacts between
police agencies of the United States and
US foreign or military intelligence
agencies be limited to those
circumstances which shall be required on
account of internal security or the
normal requirements and functions of
such police agencies P Media religion
and education 1 the Select Committee
recommends that US intelligence agencies
not covertly provide money or other
valuable consideration to persons
associated with religious or educational
institutions or to employees or
representatives of any journal or
electronic media with general
circulation in the United States or use
such institutions or individuals for
purposes of cover the foregoing
prohibitions are intended to apply to
American citizens and institutions to
the select committee further recommends
that US intelligence agencies not
covertly publish books or plant or
suppress stories in
journals or electronic media with
general circulation in the United States
queue restrictions on military
intelligence what the Select Committee
recommends that the intelligence
components of the Armed Services of the
United States be prohibited from
engaging in covert action within the
United States it is further recommended
that clandestine activities against
non-military US citizens abroad be
prescribed are classification one the
Select Committee recommends that the
classification of information be the
subject of the enactment of specific
legislation and further as an adjunct to
such legislation there be provided a
method of regular declassification s
Inspector General for intelligence what
the Select Committee recommends the
establishment of an independent office
of the Inspector General for
intelligence who shall have full
authority to investigate any possible or
potential misconduct on the part of the
various intelligence agencies or the
personnel therein the IG I shall be
appointed by the president with the
approval of the Senate for a term of 10
years and shall not be permitted to
succeed himself the IG I shall have full
access on demand to all records and
personnel of the intelligence agencies
for the purpose of pursuing his
investigations he shall make an annual
report to the Congress of his activities
and make such additional reports to the
intelligence committees or other
appropriate oversight committees as he
may choose or the committee's made erect
t domestic one the Select Committee
recommends that judicial warrant must
issue on probable cause before an
informant or any other agent of the FBI
may infiltrate any domestic group or
Association when investigation of such
group or Association or its members is
based solely on Title 18 USC two three
eight three two three eight four
two three eight five two the Select
Committee recommends that the director
of the FBI have a term of office no
longer than two presidential terms three
the Select Committee recommends that the
Internal Security branch of the
Intelligence Division be abolished and
that the counterintelligence branch be
reorganized to constitute a full
division named the counterintelligence
division that the mission of this
division be limited to investigating and
countering the efforts of foreign
directed groups and individuals against
the United States for the Select
Committee recommends the transfer of all
investigations of alleged criminal
activity by domestic groups or
individual members thereof to the
general Investigative Division five the
Select Committee recommends that
regulations be promulgated that tie the
investigation of activities of terrorist
groups closely to specific violations of
criminal law within the investigative
jurisdiction of the FBI and that charged
the Department of Justice with
determining when a domestic political
action group may be appropriately
targeted for investigation of terrorist
activities additional recommendations of
Honorable les Aspin all the hearings all
the hassles and all the headlines should
have underscored the fact that the
Select Committee really faced three
challenges how to banish abuses from the
intelligence system how to control
covert operations and how to improve the
intelligence product the analysis for
which we spend so much money the
committee has approved a number of
recommendations which go to the heart of
these problems the establishment of an
independent Inspector General for
intelligence will provide an office
designed exclusively to Hawkeye the
intelligence community and see that it
is adhering to the law the
institutionalization of a successor to
the 40 committee will provide systematic
direction of covert operations by the
executive branch for the first time
and creation of a more powerful director
of Central Intelligence well for the
first time give one man the authority to
whip the many intelligence fiefdom into
line and eliminate the duplication and
waste that the committee found to be
rife I think that there is more that we
could have done and I have two
additional proposals the Select
Committee suggested that a Standing
Committee be informed of an approved
covert operation within 48 hours after
its approval I have proposed that a
standing committee be informed of covert
operations before they are approved by
the president the standing committee or
committees should not have veto power
but the committee's or their members
individually should have the opportunity
to make their views known to the
president no doubt a number of members
would simply write out a list of
reservations to cover themselves in case
an operation went wrong but is that bad
it is a good idea to have advice
reaching the president from a few people
who have a bias for negativism there is
too much me to ISM and the executive
branch already furthermore if the
members of the new 40 committee knew
that Congress was part of the
consultative process they would be
likely to move with greater care and
discretion than has been true in the
past prior notification of Congress is
one more governor on the intelligence
vehicle which could inhibit the kind of
reckless driving the committee uncovered
in its investigations the committee and
a number of its recommendations has
sought to provide a framework for
improvement but we have left the CIA
high and dry organizationally
I believe that the CIA should be divided
into two separate agencies one devoted
only to analysis and the other
responsible for clandestine collection
and covert operations splitting the CIA
is the key to attracting the kinds of
young men and women we need an
intelligence analysis the hostility the
CIA has aroused is bound to discourage
many good people from applying
furthermore the analysts need and
changes with academia and these ties
have been strained by the public
perceptions that anyone connected with
the CIA has blood on his hands we have
also seen as in the Bay of Pigs that
proximity breeds bias one side of the
CIA planned the Bay of Pigs the other
side of the CIA was not in a position to
analyze it independently and critically
critics say it is impossible to separate
covert collection from covert operations
that many of the same people are used
for the two purposes this is quite true
however my proposal leaves covert
collection and covert operations in the
same organization and simply splits them
off from the analytical function no
improvements will result if proposals
for reform are consigned to the archives
like the report of this committee our
intelligence services have been ignored
by Congress in the past and we have seen
the consequences of that inattention
Congress now has a second chance to
decide if it wishes to play Pontius
Pilate and wash its hands of an
unpleasant business or confront the
issue head-on
I hope the Congress will not abdicate
its responsibilities any more les Aspin
additional recommendations of honorable
Ronald V dellums I supported the
committee majority and bringing to the
House of Representatives those
recommendations finally adopted by the
committee however this should not
indicate my approval of all the adopted
recommendations several are not strong
enough and several additional
recommendations should have been adopted
these recommendations should stimulate
extremely important and timely
discussion debate and consensus about
such vital and basic questions as one is
secrecy compatible with principles of
democracy ostensibly embodied in our
constitutional form of government - if
and where is secrecy necessary three how
much secrecy
is required and what forms should it
take for what safeguards against abuse
are required five what if any are our
legitimate and necessary intelligence
needs six how much change restructuring
and or elimination of organizations are
required to meet on the one hand the
legitimate intelligence needs of our
nation and on the other hand safeguard
against abuse of people power and the
Constitution seven as our world
continues its rapid changes and shifts
what level of our already limited
resources do we perceive as necessary to
meet our intelligence needs these and
other questions must be discussed and
debated within an atmosphere of Reason
to resolve these questions and reach
some consensus it will demand the best
within each of us as representatives of
the people the issues both implicitly
and explicitly raised by the committee
recommendations are of extreme
importance and must be addressed within
that context I oppose the Committee's
recommendation regarding a a House
Committee on Intelligence insofar as the
committee shall have exclusive
jurisdiction for all covert action
operations I believe that this
information should be more widely shared
discerning oversight is facilitated by
involving several relevant committees
and I think jurisdiction over covert
action operations should be shared with
those committees presently involved I am
opposed to that part of the
recommendation regarding B release of
information for the Select Committee
recommends that the rule of the house be
revised to provide that any member who
reveals any classified information which
jeopardizes the national security of the
United States may be censored or
expelled by a two-thirds vote of the
house national security is now an
infamous phrase one open to mischievous
interpretation there is a great danger
in constructing a chilling system
which allows demagogues the easy
opportunity of injuring a member by
making reckless charges the committee's
recommendation on covert action is not
satisfactory the committee
recommendations say one the Select
Committee recommends that all activities
involving direct or indirect attempts to
assassinate any individual and all
paramilitary activities shall be
prohibited except in time of war we
should prohibit all covert action we
live in a world in which secrecy and
cloak-and-dagger methods and my
estimation are anachronism from the past
they should have no place today in the
world we will continue to live in it
seems to me that whatever action this
country takes in a world that is
becoming this small and this
interdependent ought to be overt action
the United States ought to begin to play
an aggressive role as an advocate of
peace in the world as an advocate of
humanitarian concerns and frankly I
believe that the level of secrecy that
we have been exposed to as members of
this committee flies in the face of
democratic principle many people
conveniently wrap themselves quite fully
in the flag but when pressed to the wall
on whether or not they're willing
seriously to support democratic
principles I find that they are willing
to sidestep principle democracy is based
on a notion of the development of a
consensus and my estimation covert
action does not provide for that
consensus it does not provide for debate
needed to achieve consensus instead
covert actions are recommended and
approved by a small select group of
people the actions can at some point be
extremely expensive at some point
extraordinarily risky and at some point
fly in the face of open debate on any
given question I think that detrimental
to the democratic process I am willing
to try democracy my concern is that our
democracy has been for the most part a
charade or merely symbolic and I am Not
sure that many of us true
believe in the concept of majority rule
I'm concerned about secretly providing
arms and aid to other countries
presidents able to sit down with other
presidents and making deals yet these
things are issues we found that are part
of the range of covert actions utilized
by this country I think our world is
much too complicated to continue to
function effectively in this manner the
more we get involved in covert action
the more we become accused of covert
actions in places where we may not be
involved at all so the question is does
it really assist this country's role in
the world to continue these kind of
activities my answer is no indeed I
think we do much more harm continuing to
function covertly many of these
operations are well known except to the
people of the states
and/or their representatives so where
does the covert rationale apply it keeps
people who are part of this society out
of the decision and it comes at a level
which keeps representatives of the
people out of those decisions
I see no justification for covert
operations if we want to assist then why
not do it in the open and let the debate
deal with the question of what our role
ought to be somewhere in the world on
the bias of a consensus publicly made
then we can assist but why do we have to
play games why do we have to get
involved another related question is
where have covert operations taken us
are the nations that we have been
involved with free democratic societies
where the masses of people have benefits
of democracy or are those nations for
the most part military dictators
right-wing junta's or regimes with
extraordinary wealth and power in the
hands of a few elitists if the latter
holds it totally contradicts stated
principles of this country if we have
been involved in covert actions which
generated democracy freedom and justice
around the world maybe we might arrive
at some different conclusion but I don't
think anyone can justify continued
covert action on grounds that we foster
and develop democracy around the world
if covert action isn't banned the
committee's recommendations on covert
action should be strengthened and it
should be required that the Oversight
Committee have pre knowledge of all
major covert activities the nature of
covert actions and espionage subtract
from the main responsibilities of the
CIA to serve as an independent central
research and analysis facility since
active involvement in clandestine
operations can force analysis to be
silenced for policy needs certain
present functions of the CIA should be
divided and a separate espionage human
intelligence clandestine operations
agency be formed in his testimony dr.
ray s Klein called for a central
research and analysis facility to
provide objective assessments of
national security data to Congress and
the National Security Council I agree
and I believe this ought to be a
separate organization not linked to any
policymaker other than the president and
as free from other institutional bias as
possible actually research and analysis
are the original functions of the CIA
and our functions that the Central
Intelligence Agency apparently does
better than any other agency in the
intelligence community its research and
analysis functions should be facilitated
I recommend that the Central
Intelligence Agency be split into two
agencies an intelligence research and
analysis agency and a second agency to
conduct whatever espionage and covert
action functions are authorized in
addition and I recommend that both the
new intelligence research and analysis
agency and the new espionage and covert
agency by independent agencies subject
to all controls recommended by this
committee possible violations of law by
intelligence agency employees or agents
should be investigated and if required
prosecuted by the Department of Justice
no agency should have the right or
capability to bar investigation or
prosecution
in addition to criminal penalties there
must be provision for civil liability
for abuses of authority legislation
should provide for jurisdiction
justiciability and standing discovery
and relief several other recommendations
are included in my supplemental views to
the report of the House Select Committee
on Intelligence every member and the
public must have access to that report
it is imperative that the House of
Representatives now consider these
issues and pass legislation based on
these recommendations
Ronald V Dellums additional recommend
of honorable william layman there is no
question in my mind that the united
states must have a strong effective
professional intelligence service our
national security depends on it yet that
intelligence service is but part of our
government and like all parts it must be
balanced against a continuing need for
and our tradition of an open society as
well as this nation's moral position
there is now no other country in the
world who can take our place if I were
CIA director I would be happy to see a
strong congressional oversight committee
because it would be the most effective
safeguard against wrongly conceived and
wrongly motivated covert actions
originating in the executive branch
despite allegations to the contrary
congressional investigations have not
prevented the agency from doing an
effective job past performance bears
this out in fact the failure of the CIA
and other intelligence agencies to give
adequate warning of several
international crises may simply indicate
the limited ability of intelligence to
safeguard our national security there
was for example the October 1973 Mideast
war where there was more than enough
information available to warn of the
impending Arab attack there were other
failures as well the 1974 coup and
Cyprus and the subsequent Turkish
invasion the Indian nuclear explosion
the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia
the Tet Offensive in Vietnam and the
leftist coup and Portugal all of these
failures occurred long before any
congressional committee was directed to
investigate the intelligence community
the intelligence community has operated
in the past with a virtual blank check
budget this not only removes any
incentive to curtail wasteful programs
but through the very availability of
funds leads to both foolish and
dangerous covert operations yet I am
concerned by the committee's
recommendation that a line-item figure
for the CIA appear in the budget
it really possible to get a true and
accurate figure in the event that one of
the branches of the armed services
details a vessel to the CIA is the cost
of that vessel a part of the costs of
intelligence in my view a line-item
figure for the agency must conform to
principles of sound accounting practice
only then will it have any meaning at
all the FBI the committee hearings on
the FBI documented the problem of
informants turned agents provocateur
informants are necessary the use of
provocateurs is totally contrary to
principles of decency and honesty one of
these agents provocateur was William
Limor who worked in Florida as an
informant for the bureau Limor
infiltrated the Vietnam veterans against
the war and became one of the most
active members of the chapter as such he
allegedly suggested violent means of
expressing VV aw disagreement with the
country's Vietnam War policy this kind
of activity directed by the nation's
foremost law enforcement agency is
plainly and starkly wrong the IRS IRS
projects such as operation leprechaun
operation tradewinds and operation Haven
clearly demonstrate that the IRS has
gone far beyond its prescribed role in
tax enforcement each of these projects
involved illegalities and abuses by the
Intelligence Division of IRS in my own
state of Florida I would only comment
here that our system is grossly misused
when federal agencies violate the law
and their attempts to enforce it to
adopt the methods of criminals is to
become indistinguishable from them
recommendations I strongly support the
Committee's recommendation that no
member of the House serve on the new
Oversight Committee we propose for more
than six years such a limitation will
help to ensure that the committee's
members retain their objectivity and not
come to look on the intelligence
community as their own
that preserve a similar limitation
should be imposed on the directors of
the CIA and FBI so that neither is
allowed to serve for so many years that
he can no longer distinguish between
himself and his job one of the
committee's recommendations would
require the FBI agents or informants
have a judicial warrant before
attempting to infiltrate any domestic
group or Association I agree that this
requirement is necessary to protect the
rights of American citizens but in light
of recent tragedies perpetrated by
international terrorist groups I feel
that such a restriction should not be
imposed when the group or Association is
wholly or partly made up of aliens in
comparison with other intelligence
agencies and indeed with government
agencies in general I find the CIA to be
highly professional and very dedicated
despite past lack of accountability the
CIA is doing a high-level cost-effective
job particularly in its intelligence
gathering function however there are
serious deficiencies in the operation of
the CIA a much constructive rebuilding
must be done if American intelligence
activities are to be conducted with
responsibility and integrity and without
undermining the spirit of our democratic
society bill layman recommendation
honorable Dale Milford a a House
Committee on Intelligence one I
recommend that there be formed a
Standing Committee on Intelligence of
the House of Representatives and that
committee shall consist of members who
hold the respect and confidence of the
general membership of the House a the
membership of the Standing Committee on
Intelligence shall be selected from
sitting members of the following House
committees two members from armed
services two members from internal
relations one member from Science and
Technology one member from banking and
currency one member from judiciary one
member from Public Works and
transportation one member from
government operations one member from
interstate and foreign commerce a
chairman to be nominated by the speaker
be the candidates for membership on the
Standing Committee on Intelligence shall
be nominated by resolution from the
above listed committees supplying the
number of members designated above
nominees shall then be confirmed by the
Democratic caucus or the Republican
Conference by means of a secret ballot
vacancies shall be filled by like action
see candidate selection for service on
the Standing Committee on Intelligence
shall be based on individual
qualifications and technical expertise
rather than party affiliation except
that the total membership of the
Standing Committee on Intelligence must
always have no less than one-third of
its total members from each of the major
parties should the occasion arise when a
major party does not have one-third of
its members represented on the committee
the speaker shall designate to the
nominating committee or committees the
necessary number of partisan candidates
to be selected be release of information
one I recommend that the Standing
Committee on Intelligence or any member
of the committee shall not directly or
indirectly release any information
documents or data bearing a security
classification unless and until the
following sequential procedures have
been completed a
the committee passes a resolution
expressing the need and reason for
declassification be the appropriate
administrative agency has been allowed
reasonable time to agree with the
declassification or to present reasons
for opposition see a house leadership
committee consisting of the speaker the
majority leader the Minority Leader the
majority and minority whips and the
chairmen of the committees from which
the Intelligence Committee membership
has been selected a majority of the
total being present shall approve or
disapprove of the declassification and
release D notwithstanding the
committee's approval or disapproval any
committee member who disagrees shall
have a right to petition individual
members of the leadership committee if
three or more members of the leadership
committee shall concur said members
shall have a right to be heard by the
full leadership committee II any
intelligence committee member who shall
release any materials documents or data
bearing a security classification
without complying with the above
provisions shall be subject to expulsion
from the House of Representatives and
shall be subject to appropriate criminal
or civil action notwithstanding
legislative immunity to a any member of
the house having knowledge of classified
materials documents or data who shall
release such material documents or data
without obtaining the approval of a
majority of the members of the
leadership committee shall be subject to
expulsion from the House of
Representatives and shall be subject to
any appropriate criminal or civil
actions notwithstanding legislative
immunity C penalties for improper
release of classified information I
recommend that the United States code be
amended to provide criminal sanctions
against any person who shall disclose or
reveal properly classified information
documents data or plans concerning the
national security of the United States
such sanctions to apply regardless of
intent to harm the United States or to
aid a foreign nation notwithstanding
a slate of immunity Dale Milford
recommendation of honourable Morgan F
Murphy in light of the investigation by
the House Select Committee on
Intelligence
I recommend that Congress enact
legislation or amend existing
legislation to protect the
confidentiality of tax records of
American citizens section six one zero
three of the Internal Revenue Code
refers to tax returns as public records
but specifies that they be quote open to
inspection only upon order of the
president and under rules and
regulations prescribed by the secretary
or his delegate and approved by the
president and quote public use and abuse
of the records however have been more
the rule than the exception in the
recent past there has been little
emphasis on the need for protecting the
confidentiality of tax records I
recommend a shift in emphasis back to
the basic right of taxpayers to privacy
regarding their tax affairs we must do
more than limit disclosures to certain
agencies individuals congressional
committees and States we must require
the entity seeking tax information to
prove that such information is essential
to the entity's function and further
that the tax information cannot
otherwise be acquired
I suggest that House and Senate
committees with jurisdiction act with
all deliberate speed to finalize their
work on legislation to better ensure the
privacy of tax records Morgan F Murphy
additional recommend a
of Honorable James V Stanton how it go
beyond recommendation n of the Select
Committee which proposed that the
assistant to the president for national
security affairs be prohibited from
holding any cabinet level position by
recommending the enactment of
legislation which one states that the
individual who holds this position
cannot hold any other office in the
federal government nor may he be a
member of the Armed Forces to requires
Senate confirmation of this position and
three in order to achieve these purposes
establishes statutorily the position of
special assistant to the president for
national security affairs I've
introduced a bill HR 1 0 7 5 4 which
embodies these provisions James V
Stanton alternative recommendations of
Honorable Robert McLaury I support the
recommendation contained in the majority
report under headings D F G I J L n o Q
R and s with the exception of section 1
I do not approve of the other
recommendations and I offer the
following alternative recommendations in
those areas in which I believe reform is
necessary and appropriate a alternative
recommendation
I recommend that there be established a
permanent standing committee on
intelligence of the House of
Representatives 1 the committee shall
consist of five members composed of one
member from each of the following
committees a appropriations be Armed
Services C international relations D
judiciary and E government operations no
more than three of whom shall be members
of the same political party the
committee membership should reflect a
broad representation of political and
philosophical views to no member of the
committee may serve more than three
consecutive terms on the committee and
no member of the staff may serve more
than six consecutive years
three any past or current member of the
committee staff who shall release
without authorization of the committee
materials or information obtained by the
committee shall be immediately
terminated from employment and shall be
fully subject to criminal and civil
liability notwithstanding legislative
immunity for the committee's
jurisdiction shall include all
legislative and oversight functions
relating to all US agencies and
departments engaged in foreign or
domestic intelligence activities the
committee shall have exclusive
jurisdiction for all covert action
operations all remaining oversight
functions may be concurrent with other
Committees of the house five the
committee shall be vested with subpoena
power and the rules of the house should
be amended to give the committee the
right to enforce its subpoenas through a
civil contempt proceeding in the US
District Court for the District of
Columbia without specific authorization
from the full house be release of
information one I recommend that the
House Committee on Intelligence have the
right to release any classified
information or documents in its
possession or control only if the
following procedures are adhered to a
the committee shall have the duty to
consult with other agencies of the
government within the intelligence
community or the executive branch with
respect to the public disclosure of any
classified information before any formal
committee vote on release be after such
consultation the committee may by an
affirmative vote of a majority of the
members submit the material proposed to
be released to the president see if
within a reasonable period of time the
president certifies in writing that the
disclosure of the material would be
detrimental to the national security of
the United States the material would not
be disclosed or released failing any
such presidential certification the
committee would be able to release the
material D in the event of such a
certification by the president the
committee shall be given standing to sue
and the US District Court for
the District of Columbia shall be given
jurisdiction over such disputes so that
the matter can be submitted to the
courts for judicial determination see
covert action one I recommend that all
activities involving direct or indirect
attempts to assassinate any individual
be prohibited by law except in time of
war two I recommend that appropriate
legislation be enacted to require prior
approval by the House Committee on
Intelligence for all military and
paramilitary covert actions proposed by
the US government including those
actions in which arms or funds for arms
would be provided covertly three I
recommend that as to all other covert
actions of a significant size or
involving significant risk the Director
of Central Intelligence be required
within 48 hours of initial
implementation to notify the committee
in writing and in detail of the nature
extent purpose risk and costs of the
operation D improved security for
classified information in the house 1 I
recommend that the rules of the house be
revised to provide that any member who
violates the confidentiality of any
executive session of the House Committee
may be censured or expelled by a
two-thirds vote of the house 2 I
recommend that the rules of the house be
amended to provide that any committee of
the house which has access to classified
information has the authority to
discipline any member which it
reasonably believes has disclosed or
publicized such information and
violation of the rules of
confidentiality duly adopted by such
committee these committees ought to be
delegated authority by the full house to
take appropriate disciplinary action
against such a member to ensure
compliance with the rules of
confidentiality appropriate disciplinary
action could be taken only after a vote
of a majority of the majority members
and a majority of the minority members
of the committee
and any member against whom such
disciplinary action is taken shall have
a right of appeal to the full house II
Gao audit Authority I recommend that the
General Accounting Office be empowered
to conduct full and complete financial
audits of all intelligence agencies
there should not be any limitation on
Gao access in the performance of these
functions by any classification system
and the financial audit function of Gao
should specifically apply to those funds
which currently may be expended on
certification of a director of an agency
alone F detailees I recommend that
intelligence agencies disclose the
affiliation of their employees on detail
to other government agencies or
departments to the heads of such
agencies and that detailees not be
placed in any position in which an
actual or apparent conflict or interest
might exist robert McLaury dissenting
and additional recommendations of
Honorable David C train to the
recommendations of the House Select
Committee on Intelligence the following
are my specific recommendations on the
subjects which they concern which may
differ very or coincide with
recommendations on similar subjects by
the majority the absence of any
recommendation on a subject covered by
the majority is not to be construed as
concurrence or non concurrence with the
majority recommendation recommendation
number one joint oversight committee I
recommend that there be established a
Joint Congressional Committee on Foreign
Intelligence which committee shall have
oversight and legislative authority with
respect to all foreign intelligence
activities a the joint committee shall
consist of no more than 14 members
equally divided between the House and
Senate the Committees of the House and
Senate having jurisdiction over
International Affairs Armed Services and
defense appropriations shall each be
entitled to represent
on the joint committee by at least one
member of those committees be membership
on the joint committee shall be limited
to a period of six years and beginning
with the fifth year at least one third
of the committee membership shall
consist of new members see any past or
current member of the joint committee
staff who shall release without proper
authorization materials or information
obtained by the joint committee shall be
immediately terminated from employment
and shall be fully subject to criminal
and civil action notwithstanding any
plea of legislative immunity d the joint
committee shall be vested with subpoena
power and the rules of the house shall
be amended to give the joint committee
the right to enforce its subpoenas
through a civil contempt proceeding in
the US District Court for the District
of Columbia without specific
authorization from the full house
recommendation number 2 obligations of
the executive branch
I recommend that the executive branch be
required to keep the joint committee
promptly and fully informed as to all
intelligence activities including covert
actions and including full disclosure of
allocations wherever they may be in the
budget with regard to foreign
intelligence and all expenditures of
funds by all departments and agencies of
the executive branch for foreign
intelligence and covert activities
recommendation number 3 access to and
release of classified information I
recommend that the rules of the House
and Senate where necessary be conformed
to accommodate the following
recommendations and that where necessary
legislation be enacted and aid there of
a access to information and materials
furnished to the Joint Committee an
executive session or classified secret
by the executive branch shall not be
accessible to other members of Congress
except upon a resolution permitting such
access adopted by a two-thirds vote of
the membership of both the House and
Senate members voting in person and not
by proxy
be prior to any action to permit access
of such information to other members of
Congress the executive branch shall be
given reasonable opportunity to testify
and present evidence in executive
session regarding the proposed action
see materials and information received
from the executive branch an executive
session of the Joint Committee or
otherwise classified secret by the
executive branch may be publicly
released only upon adoption of the
resolution specified in subparagraph a
above and upon the adoption of a
resolution permitting public disclosure
adopted by a two-thirds vote of the
membership of both the House and Senate
the debate on which shall be conducted
in secret session and the vote on which
shall be in open session by recorded
vote D any member of Congress who
reveals any information and violation of
the foregoing procedures may be censured
or expelled by a 2/3 vote of the house
or the Senate as the case may be
recommendation number four agreements
for the handling of classified
information I recommend that any
information furnished to the joint
committee by the executive branch under
an agreement with the Joint Committee
for the handling of such information
shall be binding in accordance with the
terms of that agreement on the Joint
Committee on the House and Senate and on
each member of Congress violation of the
terms of the agreement shall be grounds
for censure or expulsion by a two-thirds
vote of the House or Senate as the case
may be
recommendation number five Director of
Central Intelligence
I recommend that a director of Central
Intelligence shall be established
separate from any of the operating
intelligence agencies for the purpose of
coordinating and overseeing the foreign
intelligence community his purpose shall
be to eliminate duplication and
collection and promote competition and
analysis Hey the DCI shall be appointed
by the president with the advice and
consent of the Senate be the
see I shall be the chief of foreign
intelligence officer of the United
States and shall be responsible for the
supervision and control of all agencies
of the United States engaged in foreign
intelligence see the DCI shall be a
member of the National Security Council
d the DCI may not hold any other
position office or title in the United
States government e the DCI shall along
with other such duties constitute an
Office of Inspector General for all of
the foreign intelligence agencies
including all agencies of government
which have foreign intelligence
functions such a Geneva to report all
allegations of misconduct and or
unlawful activities to the DCI F the DCI
shall be responsible for the National
Intelligence Estimates and daily
briefings of the president G the DCI
shall be responsible for reporting to
the Joint Committee on Intelligence and
other appropriate Committees of Congress
H all budget requests which include
funds for foreign intelligence or covert
activities shall and so far as such
funds are concerned be prepared in
consultation with the DCI
although the funds for foreign
intelligence activities will continue to
be budgeted in the respective agency
budgets the DCI shall be responsible to
the Joint Committee for full reporting
on the foreign intelligence and covert
activities funding set forth in all
agency budgets 1 the DCI shalt
coordinate the functions of all foreign
intelligence agencies under his
jurisdiction shall eliminate unnecessary
duplication conduct periodic evaluation
of the performance and efficiency of the
agencies and report to Congress on the
foregoing at least annually
recommendation number six disclosures to
Congress
I recommend that existing law section
102 d3 of the National Security Act of
1947 which restricts officials of the
executive branch from providing
information be amended to specifically
exclude from any such prohibition all
Committees of Congress having
appropriate jurisdiction recommendation
number seven assistant for national
security affairs
I recommend that the assistant to the
president for national security affairs
be prohibited from holding any other
position office or title in the US
government recommendation number eight
news media and publications one I
recommend that the u.s. foreign
intelligence agencies be prohibited from
covertly providing money or other
valuable consideration to employees of
full-time representatives of any journal
or electronic media with general
circulation in the United States and
prohibited from utilizing such
individuals for purposes of cover except
that such prohibition shall not apply to
the occasional or casual furniture of
news stories or articles to the news
media too I recommend that the US
intelligence agencies be prohibited from
the covert publication of books articles
or stories in any journals or electronic
media with general circulation in the
United States recommendation number nine
classification
I recommend that the class of
and declassification of information be
the subject of specific legislation by
the Congress recommendation number 10
director of the FBI
I recommend that the director of the FBI
have a term of office of five years and
that no director serve more than two
five-year terms recommendation number
eleven infiltration of groups or
associations
I recommend that judicial warrant must
issue on probable cause before an
informant or any other agent of the FBI
may infiltrate any domestic group or
Association when one investigation of
such group or Association or its members
is based solely on title 18 USC Section
two three eight three two three eight
four two three eight five and two there
is no credible evidence that such group
or Association or any person connected
therewith as encouraged advocated or
suggested the use of violence terrorist
activities or other unlawful activity
recommendation number 12 study of
intelligence operations of foreign
nations
I recommend that the Joint Congressional
Committee on Intelligence or in the
absence of the creations of such a
committee the appropriate congressional
committee or committees promptly
commence a detailed investigation and
study of the intelligence operations of
foreign nations including but not
limited to the intelligence operations
of the USSR and the People's Republic of
China which investigation and inquiry
shall include but not be limited to the
following a the means by which
intelligence is gathered relating to
activities of the United States and its
allies both within and outside of the
United States be the extent of valuable
and/or critical intelligence information
gathered by foreign nations from
publicly available journals and
documents see the methods employed by
and the extent of success of foreign
nations in the
recruitment of American or allied
nationals and espionage activities and
the methods employed by and the extent
of success of foreign nations in
infiltrating the US government or u.s.
organizations corporations associations
and groups David C Train alternative
recommendations of Honorable Robert W
Caston jr. introduction although I
wholeheartedly support many of the
recommendations proposed by the
committee's majority the majority
proposals collectively do not accurately
reflect my judgments concerning the
reforms and improvements which should be
made in the US intelligence community to
indicate specific points of agreement
and disagreement I have reproduced below
the majority recommendations together
with my own alternative or additional
proposals language and the majority
report with which I disagree has been
stricken out my alternative or
additional language has been underscored
in several instances I have also added
brief comments and brackets following
the recommendations to which the
comments refer note for the purposes of
this recording we are eliminating
duplicated text and including only the
writers additional comments
note on section a a House Committee on
Intelligence I am opposed to the
creation of two oversight committees on
intelligence when in the house and one
in the Senate I favor instead the
creation of a joint committee because it
will reduce the burden on the DCI and
intelligence officials of repeating
testimony before committees with similar
jurisdiction and also reduced the burden
of Congress by having many members
assigned to tasks which are duplicative
in addition concentration of oversight
in one joint committee would reduce the
possibility of unauthorized disclosure
of information and more importantly
would help assure that problems would
not fall between two chairs and be
addressed by neither committee the fact
that each Appropriations Committee in
reviewing the budget of the intelligence
gathering agencies would have an
oversight function reduces the
possibility that one joint committee
would be co-opted by the Intelligence
Agency notes on Director of Central
Intelligence in essence the PF IAB
chairman DCI would become the nation's
principal foreign intelligence officer
with authority over intelligence
community budgets and resources with
independence from CIA institutional
affiliation and with right of direct
access to the President as well as being
statutory advisor to the National
Security Council the president's foreign
intelligence advisory board a
prestigious board of private citizens
acting and coordinated capacity with
their chairman the DCI would enable the
nation to benefit from the exceptional
knowledge and experience of its private
citizens who would exercise both an
oversight and advisory role on sensitive
intelligence matters conclusion as these
recommendations indicate my service on
the Select Committee has convinced me
that reforms are necessary to improve
the organization performance and control
of the US intelligence community at the
same time the experience of the past
months has again confirmed my
understanding of how important an
effective intelligence capability is to
the future security of the American
people
intelligence officials
can and must operate in a manner
consistent with the individual rights
and liberties guaranteed by the
Constitution these protections must be
guaranteed but so must the right of the
American people to live in security and
peace it is both possible and essential
for the intelligence agencies to perform
their responsibilities effectively and
by means which protect both individual
rights and national security at a
minimum the intelligence community must
regain the trust and confidence of the
people whom it serves it is tragic that
it was necessary to establish this
committee to inquire into the activities
of agencies on which we depend so
heavily for our security but it would be
even more tragic if the results of our
investigation were now to be ignored
implementing the recommendations I have
proposed will contribute significantly
to ensuring that there will be no need
for another such committee to be
established in the future both Congress
and the American people must recognize
the need to complete the task which we
have only begun robert w Caston jr.
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you